---
title: The Road to Automated Builds
---

What's the quickest way to improve productivity on a project? Automation!

Early in March 2015 I transitioned to another project within my office. I was extremely excited about starting Android application development. At the same time I joined the team, the next release was in the process of being designed. The tech leads decided to transition to using the full Atlassian suite of tools from (JIRA, Bamboo Confluence, etc.). As someone who was eager to be fully agile, it was difficult to witness the lack of agile processes used by the team at that point.

I began to ask questions about process and software design and it became clear how little design was done on current software due to the "lack of time".

<!-- Two kinds of people helped me form my decisions on how to get the team moving into a higher performing team.
1. The hard-working mid-level dev
2. The cynical mid-level tester/dev -->

# Gradle

Until March, we were all working on our Android applications via Android Developer Tools (which is Eclipse based). Unfortunately, there was no build system in place (no, not even Ant). As Android Studio had just moved past 1.0 earlier in the year, I encouraged everyone to move to Android Studio. By moving to Android Studio, we gained the Gradle build system for free! This opened up a plethora of possibilities to create automatic builds for all of our Android applications.

Gradle provides something that even Maven doesn't offer: a wrapper. The Gradle wrapper provides the ability to build projects with a specific version of Gradle. This allows the build system to be a constant when the project is on many different developer machines.

Something that I thought was tricky about utilizing Gradle on a dedicated CI machine, ended up being something really interesting about how the wrapper works. The wrapper is essentially a command line tool that can be run anywhere (Windows, OS X and Linux). Because the wrapper is bundled with the project, the CI system doesn't need to have a version of Gradle installed! This means it is infinitely easier to manage build dependencies for a given project since the build system is bundled within itself.

Some build optimizations when running on a CI system such as (Bamboo, TeamCity, Circle CI, Travis CI, Jenkins, etc.):
<root of project>/build.gradle
{% highlight groovy %}
/**
 * Improve build server performance by allowing disabling of pre-dexing
 * (see http://tools.android.com/tech-docs/new-build-system/tips#TOC-Improving-Build-Server-performance.)
 */
project.ext.preDexLibs = !project.hasProperty('disablePreDex')

subprojects {
    project.plugins.whenPluginAdded { plugin ->
        if ("com.android.build.gradle.AppPlugin".equals(plugin.class.name)) {
            project.android.dexOptions.preDexLibraries = rootProject.ext.preDexLibs
        } else if ("com.android.build.gradle.LibraryPlugin".equals(plugin.class.name)) {
            project.android.dexOptions.preDexLibraries = rootProject.ext.preDexLibs
        }
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

Then one can run ./gradlew clean assemble -PdisablePreDex

# Maven


# MSBuild

Absolute hell.